There is a very spherical animal found in deserts during their wet season called the spadefoot toad. He is a small thing, ranging from 1 to 3 inches, and he is decorated along his body with red stripes, hanging against his skin like garlands from the rafters of a home in winter. This little thing can teach us a lot about emotional survival through isolation.

During the pandemic, I felt that I lost somebody inside myself. She died silently, without any funeral. I lost a girl who danced. Who painted her nails, made her bed in the morning, lit candles at night. 

I became somebody who stared obsessively into the disastrously dark space that exists between every human and the world around them, the space that bullies people into a survival mindset that intermittently allows all the beautiful little things to bleed away. Trapped by a violent limbo solely of my own creation, everything ceased to be anything.

Color bled from details of life I once loved. Strawberries ceased to taste sweet. Songs I loved began to fade, movies I watched lost moral meaning. If there was a pit inside of me this large, if there was a purgatory on this earth this painful — what was the purpose of interacting with these moments at all? Everything clouded out. 

In an attempt to find a natural connection to my smothering emotions that felt so unnatural, I learned about the similarities between humans and the spadefoot toad. During dry desert seasons, he disappears 5 to 10 feet into the ground to obtain moisture from the dirt until the surface becomes habitable. He can stay down there for up to a decade. The world around him dissipates; he understands what he must do to survive.

Humans frequently learn from nature in ways we cannot learn from one another, and the spadefoot toad understands self-preservation more than any human ever will — it’s not a form of death, it’s not proof of inherent impermanence. We mourn the people we were before, we cut our hair and tape strands of it into notebooks. We let our fingernails grow out like tree rings, forcing a state of permanence — as without it there is an all-encompassing sense of loss. Two years of pandemic caused me to consider — we only sink deeper into ourselves. When the world is dry and we need someplace safe to go, the damp caverns of our own hearts embrace us. Maybe the girl who existed in all those details isn’t dead, but rather finding her way toward the surface.

I experienced an isolated adolescence. Because of this, the moments in my life seemed meaningless. But as I begin to shake the dirt from my eyes, moments hit me with a sharp, unflinching force. It makes me realize how, at times, we must allow ourselves to sink. We must allow the surface to become habitable, allowing the ground to take care of us until we can begin our journey back up.